Now for part three of the math and mechanisms of deep learning.
You'll see how we go from a perceptron to a deep network, and you will learn how gradient descent is
extended to deal with activation functions.
It does start to get a little bit hairy towards the end, but the good part is you already know all
the math that I'm going to cover here.
It's just a matter of putting all the pieces together in the right way.
Now, before moving forwards, we need to have a bit of a simplification.
And that's because the networks are going to start getting complicated.
So far in this course we've been looking at diagrams like this where I listed the inputs to the model,
the weights, the linear summation feeding into the non-linear activation function which provides the
output of the perceptron model.
Now this is a useful diagram because it illustrates all of the computations that take place, but it's
also cumbersome and it takes up a lot of visual space.
So therefore, from now on, I'm going to simplify this entire diagram with just one circle.
So everything you see here in this perceptron model is taking place inside this circle here.
Now sometimes people call this thing an artificial neuron.
But you know, from the beginning of this course that I don't really like that term because this computation,
although incredibly simple and yet incredibly powerful, actually has really nothing to do with how
real neurons behave.
So I am going to call this a unit or a node.
Okay.
So here we see our diagram of a deep learning network.
Again each of these nodes each of these circles is actually an entire perceptron all on its own.
So each of these nodes in this network is taking in the inputs.
Computing a weighted sum over those inputs, passing that through a non-linearity, and then sending
that to the next node in the next layer of the network.
Now you can see that these units, these nodes give multiple outputs, but in fact it's the exact same
output, the same numerical value.
It's just copied to multiple units.
So these units on the left, these ones are actually getting input from the data, the measurements
from the outside world.
You know, for example, how many hours the student studied and slept or the image pixel values or the
clinical measures.
But these units here, these are actually not getting inputs directly from the data.
They get their inputs as outputs of the units from previous layers.
and those previous layers have a non-linearity built in.
And so this is the mechanism of applying non-linear transformations to the input data.
And again each of these nodes is actually implementing the same exact computation linear weighted sum
and non-linear activation function.
Now one thing you need to understand about these architectures is that each node is independent of each
other node.
In other words, this node here doesn't actually know that it is part of a larger network.
This guy here thinks that he is the only unit in the entire universe.
He gets his inputs here, but he doesn't know that these inputs come from the outputs of other units,
and he computes and passes on his output.
But he doesn't know what this output is used for.
So each unit in the network acts independently of all of the other units.
In fact, every unit in this network simply takes input processes and passes on the output, so they
all think they are individually the only unit in the universe.
It's a lonely life, but fortunately, you know, these things are not actually conscious, so we don't
have to feel bad for them.
Now, why do I mention this?
Why is this important?
It's important because we need to adjust the weights for each node independently.
So this guy here, he happens to be the final output node.
And the loss function which I told you about in the previous video.
So the difference between his output y hat and what we know is the true state of the world.
So that would be y or the target variable.
But that error is computed over here.
And it's used for learning.
And because that error signal is used for learning it needs to propagate Gate backwards through the
network to reach all of these other nodes.
And that learning process needs to be done independently for each individual node in this network.
Okay.
And with that we are now going to discuss backpropagation.
The thing about backpropagation is that it is exactly the same thing as gradient descent.
So that's this step here.
Updating the estimate of the local minimum according to itself, minus the gradient times the learning
rate.
So backpropagation is just gradient descent.
Now there is a little bit more that's involved because we have a high dimensional feature space.
And because we have embedded functions.
So we're going to need to use the chain rule of derivatives.
But the concept is the same.
So thinking back to the previous section the x axis there was called simply X, but these things are
actually going to be the weights of the model.
And again, the idea is to keep moving along this axis, the x axis or the weights axis, until we find
the set of weights that minimizes our loss or our cost function.
Now this is in one dimension which is convenient for visualization, but we have to start abstracting
this picture because we want the gradient descent procedure to work in any number of higher dimensions.
Nonetheless, this is the picture that you can keep in mind.
We continue to adjust the weights according to the derivative of the weights in order to minimize the
loss or the cost function.
So let's go through this procedure step by step.
So here we have our unit our perceptron.
Again this is the math that is taking place inside each node of the deep learning network.
work.
Now the X's are fixed.
We cannot change them.
And the output y hat is simply the result of the computation.
The only thing that we can change is w which are the weights.
So therefore we update the weights to be themselves minus the gradient times the learning rate.
So here is the learning rate.
It's often indicated using the Greek letter eta.
And here is the derivative or partial L or sometimes called dl.
This is the derivative of the loss function with respect to the weights.
So you can see here that this is just vanilla gradient descent.
Okay.
So now let's talk about this term here this derivative we need to compute the gradient of the loss function
with respect to the weights.
And it's with respect to the weights again because those are the variables that are changing.
So this little partial L over here actually expands to DL by DW or partial L partial W, which we can
expand further to replace y hat with the computation that is actually taking place inside each node.
Well, how do we actually compute this derivative.
Let's take the MSE or mean squared error as an example.
So this is the mean squared error function that you learned about in the previous video.
And now we need to compute the derivative of this function with respect to w.
Now notice that this is a compound function.
This is an embedded function.
So there's this function here which is embedded inside the activation function which is further embedded
inside this polynomial.
So we need the chain rule to unpack this.
And the math is going to start getting a little bit hairy.
So for simplicity I'm going to replace all of this inside stuff with you.
The variable you.
So now we can write out the chain rule with this substitution.
And this means that we need to compute the derivative of the loss function of u with respect to u times
the derivative of u with respect to w, and then we can expand u here to show that this is the derivative
of the forward propagation step.
Now exactly how we proceed from this point depends on the activation function, because each activation
function has its own derivative.
And I would like us to focus more on the principle here that this expression updating the weights according
to the derivative of the loss function with respect to the weights times the learning rate, or eta,
is the same thing as gradient descent, and that working through all of the details of the math gets
pretty complicated pretty quickly, because it depends on a variety of choices that you make when constructing
the model, including which loss function you use and which activation function is computed inside each
node.
Also note that I'm showing everything here with the loss function, but of course you can simply substitute
the cost function for the loss function, which doesn't actually change the idea.
It just means that we're averaging over a collection of samples instead of running back propagation
one sample at a time.
Again, it's going to make everything one layer more complicated.
It adds a little bit more complexity.
It doesn't change the fundamental principle here.
So I hope that helps understand the mechanism of backpropagation.
I admit that I went through the calculus part of it rather briskly, but the exact formulation depends
on the activation function.
And as is always the case with partial derivatives in calculus, it quickly becomes quite tedious without
any real benefit to comprehension in my opinion.
But even if I went through all the calculus, that wouldn't still fully explain how it actually works
in practice, because the actual code implementations are a little bit different from the formulas that
I showed.
Due to the potential for numerical instabilities, and also from computation time issues that arise
from implementing the calculus directly.
So, in fact, the developers of PyTorch and other deep learning toolboxes have come up with some computational
tricks to make the backpropagation procedure fast and stable.
But again, the concept is exactly the same as what you learned about in gradient descent.
Okay.
Anyway, I would like to now switch to working through examples of developing, training, and evaluating
deep learning models.